---
layout: post
title:  Booklist
date: 2014-03-05
---

I've finally decided to start recording the interesting things I've been reading (and watching),in no particular order.
This page itemizes some of the most memorable, influential, and powerful stories I've experienced (as well as most of the recent ones).
The length of the review/commentary is inversely proportional to how striking the experience was, and how long ago I read it.
Each section isn't really a 'review', but more of a commentary of the most salient features of the work, if you're looking for comprehensive commentary, you're gonna have a bad time.


---

# Contents
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{: toc}

---

# Rating Scheme
I typically don't invest significant amounts of time into something unless I enjoy it; similarly all of the items on this list that are rated, I have read/watched in their entirety, so I implicitely enjoyed them.
Under a typical rating scheme (say the Netflix 5-Star scheme) I would rate everything as at least 3/5 ("I liked it"), as this doesn't fully explore the rating space, my system uses the full 5-star range given that I had already enjoyed it.
Overall (although my ratings are as yet still fairly sparse) I would expect the average to hover around 2/5, especially for longer works.

**1-Star**: Good old fashioned mindless entertainment: flat characters and a tedious plot; would not read/watch again.

**2-Stars**: Better than 1-Star, not deserving of 3, typically characterized by moments of noticeable tedium, but altogether enjoyable.

**3-Stars**: An immersive story that begets genuine attachment to the characters, the construction of a genuinely interesting universe, would conceivably read/watch again, but only if suitably novel 'new' material is unavailable.

**4-Stars**: At the end of such stories I am left with a profound melancholy that lingers for hours if not days. The sense of personal fulfillment at having taken part in such an experience is somewhat tinged with the regret that the story is over and I must carry on, alone.

**5-Stars**: Reserved only for paradigm-shifting works that have significantly altered the way I perceive the world, memories of which are as strong as natural ones. When read again the story takes on different colours, and the previously unrealized masterful use of ambiguity opens up entire universes of interpretation. There is as much detail conveyed in what is said, than what is left unsaid.

---

# Literature
Mostly Fiction, almost entirely Prose.

## The Wizard Knight - Gene Wolfe
Its difficult to describe this as anything other than a (pair of) classic [Sword and Sorcery](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sword_and_sorcery) novel(s), with Wolfe's signature fragmentary first-person narrative style.
On the whole and entertaining book, but at times dull, and dare I say: straightforward.
However linear (with several notable exceptions), the novel does employ a fair amount of world-building; which I always like.

2-Stars.


## Home Fires - Gene Wolfe
One of (I believe) Wolfe's more recent works, Home Fires is first and foremost a love story.
With that in mind, this is the first Wolfe novel that I've read that can be construed as a detective novel, except with lawyers, carribean tourism, and human reanimation.
Ultimately, through the violence, and betrayal; the reflection and longing; this is an incredibly fast-paced novel, which I believe to be simultaneously its greatest strength and weakness.
Few authors could so carefully and beautifully construct such flawed characters amid the whorling chaos that is the storyline, and indeed it is to Wolfe's credit that everything makes sense&mdash;albeit always just a minute too late.
I believe this was intended, and the effect is by no means lost on me: I read through Home Fires in a day&mdash;it's an addicting experience.

While I thoroughly enjoyed it, I can't quite bring myself to give it 4-stars&mdash;even though the story was solid, the characters deep and flawed, and the execution; supurb.
It just didn't hold the same *magic* for me, in retrospect I think it's a better read than (but in the same category as) Stephenson's "Reamde", but not as good as "The Book of the New Sun" (TBotNS).

And yet, I'm still conflicted. After recently re-reading some of TBotNS, I sincerely believe Home Fires was better written (albeit in a different, arguabely more developed/mature style).
It's a fantastic read (highly recommended), relatively short, but (perhaps due to its lack of scope) I can't in good conscience give it a higher rating.

3-Stars

## A Song of Ice and Fire - George R.R. Martin
A good time was had by all--although in "A Dance With Dragons" I found some of the story arcs tedious.

3-Stars

## Latro in the Mist - Gene Wolfe
Technically "Soldier of the Mist", and "Soldier of Arete", Latro in the Mist follows a roman mercenary through Greece and beyond, the interesting plot mechanic, is that Latro suffers from sever short-term memory loss; he forgets everything when he sleeps.
The novels are well written (Gene Wolfe remains one of my favourite authors), and Latro's poignantly tenuous hold on reality--and himself, lead to some fantastical adventures.
As with everything else Gene Wolfe writes, there are always dark layers just hidden below the surface, and these novels are no different--allowing us an interesting look into the mind of someone who may have a serious mental illness.

3-Stars

## The Book of the New Sun - Gene Wolfe
To date, the single most intellectually pervasive series I have read.
I've reread it several times over about a decade, and each time it feels fresh and new.

Arguably one of Gene Wolfe's best works, The Book of the New Sun features some stunning world building, intriguing characters, and incredibly deep meta-narratives.
There is a particular chapter, written **entirely in metaphor** (The "Ascian's Tale"), which I think should be required reading for anyone interested in the subject.
We follow Severian, a torturer by trade, as he explores the mind-bending reality of a civilization surrounding a dying star, and ultimately, through the most haunting depiction of time-travel ever written.
As we learn more about the civilization, (particularly in "Urth of the New Sun"—which some view as not part of the original series) the imagery Wolfe paints casts shadows on all our prior understanding of the culture and characters in the novels, leading to a series that when reread comes off as a different story entirely.

Pure magic.

5-Stars.

## The Book of the Long Sun - Gene Wolfe
Admittedly, my recollection of this is a little fuzzy, I remember it seeming strange, quirky, and mysterious.
I feel like this series gets overshadowed by The Book of The New Sun, but that could just be my unique perspective.
As with everything written by Gene Wolfe, worth reading.

3-Stars.

## Anathem - Neil Stephenson
A lot of people don't like Stephenson, perhaps they (like me a couple times) got tired reading through the slightly monotonous Quicksilver series.
However I will say that Anathem hits the marks where Quicksilver missed it.
We get the same dense imagery, the same rigorous detail, but in a world that (for me at least) is inherently appealing.

4-Stars.

## The Cryptonomicon - Neil Stephenson
One of Stephenson's most popular novels, and deservingly so.
The Cryptonomicon is probably the most appealing method of simultaneously teaching people about the culture of WWII England, elementary cryptographic methodology, and modern network engineering.

3-Stars

## Reamde - Neil Stephenson
A sort of spin-off of "The Cryptonomicon", Reamde is an technophile's action-adventure novel a-la Robert Ludlum.
A great combination of crypto, economics, virtual reality, and mafioso hit squads.

3-Stars.

## Homer's Illiad & Odyssey. - Robert Fagles (Translator)
Perhaps seeming a little out of character with the other works included here, I thoroughly enjoy ancient stories, particularly the diction/verse. I've read both the Fagles and Butler translations, and I prefer Fagles (although it was the first one I read, so there is the novelty affect).
Of particular interest—especially of The Odyssey, is the abstract realization of "The Prototypical Story", and how tales of tricksters and heroes are subtly and mysteriously worked (over thousands of years) and reworked into the modern fabric of pop-culture.

3-Stars.

---

# Video
Mostly Anime

## Blue Exorcist (2011)

Nothing to see here.

1-star.

## Fate/Zero (2011)
I really like dark anime, and this is no exception.
Fate/Zero has moderately complex characters, and great visual style; however the aspect that separates it from other anime with similar qualities (SAO, Cowboy Bebop, etc.) is the depiction of really gritty violence and suffering.
There are no prototypical heroes and villains (although I imagine the development of the principal antagonist is somewhat straightforward), and almost every character is severely flawed.
The backstories of the various characters are revealed sparingly, with enough left out to allow for the tactful use of ambiguity.
All in all, a deep and interesting story, with near superb execution.

What separates it (in terms of the level of enjoyment) for me from something like SAO, is that nothing is held back in the depictions of atrocity---some of the characters in Fate/Zero are truly evil: and there is no filter.
Similarly some of the characters have motivations that are real heart-jerkers, and it's terrifying to witness their battle with madness.

The Cowboy Bebop comparison is a little more subtle.
If Cowboy Bebop is great the same way a show like Firefly is (solid characters, great serialization, sub themes etc.) Fate/Zero is great in that it is a story that has a true ending.
We know from the beginning what the outcome will be, and how long it will take to get there, whats left for us to enjoy is the drama that unfolds along the way.
Similarly, the Fate/Zero ends in a similar manner (conceptually) to how Cowboy Bebop does, delivering closure, but also with a tinge of hope.

4-stars.

## Sword Art Online (2012)
On the surface, an effervescent anime with moderately complex characters.
However, the ease and fluidity with which SAO deals with complex and personal themes surrounding identity, and control betrays a much more mature purpose;
and there were several scenes that snapped me out of my comfort zone (although that could just be some Japanese culture bleeding through).

Perhaps I'm acutely susceptible to a well told coming-of-age story, partly some sweet-sweet catharsis relating to my own gaming experience, whatever it was, the series was addictive, and it's surprisingly easy to 'binge'—in fact I think I may have watched the first 6-hours in a single sitting.

3-Stars.

## Attack on Titan (2013)
I ran into this on Netflix during a particularly mind-expanding neuroscience assignment and got hooked.
A visually striking dystopian anime (gorgeous animation), Attack on Titan has everything a good anime should have: compelling plot, intrigue, and shameless single-frame internal monologues.
On that note, AoT definitely suffers from what I'll call "gratuitous monologuing syndrome", but after a while I just tuned it out.
Not the best anime I've seen recently, but a genuinely novel world, with some interesting political critiques, I'm looking forward to the next season.

2-Stars.

## Cowboy Bebop (1998)
The best soundtrack of any show ever.
Yoko Kanno is a god.

4-Stars.

## Ghost in the Shell (1995)
Aside from an intriguing plot, and exciting action sequences, this film depicts a dark and gritty post-cyberpunk future eerily similar to that of Bladerunner.

3-Stars
